Consider a university having 15,000 students and let $X =$ the number of
courses for which a randomly selected student is registered. The pmf of
$X$ follows. Since $p\left( 1\right) = {.01}$ , we know that
$\left( {.01}\right) \cdot \left( {{15},{000}}\right) = {150}$ of the
students are registered for one course, and similarly for the other $x$
values.

::: center
:::

(3.6)

The average number of courses per student, or the average value of $X$
in the population, results from computing the total number of courses
taken by all students and dividing by the total number of students.
Since each of 150 students is taking one course, these 150 contribute
150 courses to the total. Similarly, 450 students contribute 2(450)
courses, and so on. The population average value of $X$ is then

$$\frac{1\left( {150}\right) + 2\left( {450}\right) + 3\left( {1950}\right) + \cdots + 7\left( {300}\right) }{{15},{000}} = {4.57} \tag{3.7}$$

Since
${150}/{15},{000} = {.01} = p\left( 1\right) ,{450}/{15},{000} = {.03} = p\left( 2\right)$
, and so on, an alternative expression for (3.7) is

$$1 \cdot p\left( 1\right) + 2 \cdot p\left( 2\right) + \cdots + 7 \cdot p\left( 7\right) \tag{3.8}$$

Expression (3.8) shows that to compute the population average value of
$X$ , we need only the possible values of $X$ along with their
probabilities (proportions). In particular, the population size is
irrelevant as long as the pmf is given by (3.6). The average or mean
value of $X$ is then a weighted average of the possible values
$1,\ldots ,7$ , where the weights are the probabilities of those values.

[[3.3.1 The Expected Value of X]]

[[3.3.2 The Expected Value of a Function]]

[[3.3.3 Expected Value of a Linear Function]]

[[3.3.4 The Variance of X]]

[[3.3.5 A Shortcut Formula for sigma2]]

[[3.3.6 Variance of a Linear Function]]

[[EXERCISES Section 3.3 (29-45)]]