The expected value of $X$ describes where the probability distribution
is centered. Using the physical analogy of placing point mass
$p\left( x\right)$ at the value $x$ on a one-dimensional axis, if the
axis were then supported by a fulcrum placed at $\mu$ , there would be
no tendency for the axis to tilt. This is illustrated for two different
distributions in Figure 3.7. Copyright 2016 Congage Learning. All Rights
Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in
part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be
suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). Editorial review has
deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the
overall learning experience. Congage Learning reserves the right to
remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions
require it.

::: center
![image](images/019165cb-e657-75f5-b964-f15ddb80567f_19_883618.jpg){width="80%"}
:::

Figure 3.7 Two different probability distributions with $\mu = 4$

Although both distributions pictured in Figure 3.7 have the same center
$\mu$ , the distribution of Figure 3.7(b) has greater spread (i.e.,
variability or dispersion) than does that of Figure 3.7(a). We will use
the variance of $X$ to assess the amount of variability in (the
distribution of) $X$ , just as ${s}^{2}$ was used in Chapter 1 to
measure variability in a sample.

::: mdframed
DEFINITION
:::

Let $X$ have $\operatorname{pmf}p\left( x\right)$ and expected value
$\mu$ . Then the variance of $X$ , denoted by $V\left( X\right)$ or
${\sigma }_{X}^{2}$ , or just ${\sigma }^{2}$ , is

$$V\left( X\right) = \mathop{\sum }\limits_{D}{\left( x - \mu \right) }^{2} \cdot p\left( x\right) = E\left\lbrack {\left( X - \mu \right) }^{2}\right\rbrack$$

The standard deviation (SD) of $X$ is

$${\sigma }_{X} = \sqrt{{\sigma }_{X}^{2}}$$

The quantity $h\left( X\right) = {\left( X - \mu \right) }^{2}$ is the
squared deviation of $X$ from its mean, and ${\sigma }^{2}$ is the
expected squared deviation-i.e., the weighted average of squared
deviations, where the weights are probabilities from the distribution.
If most of the probability distribution is close to $\mu$ , then
${\sigma }^{2}$ will be relatively small. However, if there are $x$
values far from $\mu$ that have large $p\left( x\right)$ , then
${\sigma }^{2}$ will be quite large. Very roughly, $\sigma$ can be
interpreted as the size of a representative deviation from the mean
value $\mu$ . So if $\sigma = {10}$ , then in a long sequence of
observed $X$ values, some will deviate from $\mu$ by more than 10 while
others will be closer to the mean than that-a typical deviation from the
mean will be something on the order of 10 .

EXAMPLE 3.24 A library has an upper limit of 6 on the number of DVDs
that can be checked out to an individual at one time. Consider only
those who currently have DVDs checked out, and let $X$ denote the number
of DVDs checked out to a randomly selected individual. The pmf of $X$ is
as follows:

::: center
:::

The expected value of $X$ is easily seen to be $\mu = {2.85}$ . The
variance of $X$ is then

$$V\left( X\right) = {\sigma }^{2} = \mathop{\sum }\limits_{{x = 1}}^{6}{\left( x - {2.85}\right) }^{2} \cdot p\left( x\right)$$

$$= {\left( 1 - {2.85}\right) }^{2}\left( {.30}\right) + {\left( 2 - {2.85}\right) }^{2}\left( {.25}\right) + \cdots + {\left( 6 - {2.85}\right) }^{2}\left( {.15}\right) = {3.2275}$$

The standard deviation of $X$ is $\sigma = \sqrt{3.2275} = {1.800}$ .

When the pmf $p\left( x\right)$ specifies a mathematical model for the
distribution of population values, both ${\sigma }^{2}$ and $\sigma$
measure the spread of values in the population; ${\sigma }^{2}$ is the
population variance, and $\sigma$ is the population standard deviation.