# 3.4 The Binomial Probability Distribution

There are many experiments that conform either exactly or approximately
to the following list of requirements:

1\. The experiment consists of a sequence of $n$ smaller experiments
called trials, where $n$ is fixed in advance of the experiment.

2\. Each trial can result in one of the same two possible outcomes
(dichotomous trials), which we generically denote by success
$\left( S\right)$ and failure $\left( F\right)$ . The assignment of the
$S$ and $F$ labels to the two sides of the dichotomy is arbitrary.

3\. The trials are independent, so that the outcome on any particular
trial does not influence the outcome on any other trial.

4\. The probability of success $P\left( S\right)$ is constant from trial
to trial; we denote this probability by $p$ .

DEFINITION An experiment for which Conditions 1-4 (a fixed number of
dichotomous, independent, homogenous trials) are satisfied is called a
binomial experiment.

EXAMPLE 3.27 Consider each of the next $n$ vehicles undergoing an
emissions test, and let $S$ denote a vehicle that passes the test and
$F$ denote one that fails to pass. Then this experiment satisfies
Conditions 1-4. Tossing a thumbtack $n$ times, with $S =$ point up and
$F =$ point down, also results in a binomial experiment, as would the
experiment in which the gender ( $S$ for female and $F$ for male) is
determined for each of the next $n$ children born at a particular
hospital.

Many experiments involve a sequence of independent trials for which
there are more than two possible outcomes on any one trial. A binomial
experiment can then be created by dividing the possible outcomes into
two groups.

EXAMPLE 3.28 The color of pea seeds is determined by a single genetic
locus. If the two alleles at this locus are AA or Aa (the genotype),
then the pea will be yellow (the phenotype), and if the allele is aa,
the pea will be green. Suppose we pair off 20 Aa seeds and cross the two
seeds in each of the ten pairs to obtain ten new genotypes. Call each
new genotype a success $S$ if it is aa and a failure otherwise. Then
with this identification of $S$ and $F$ , the experiment is binomial
with $n = {10}$ and $p = P$ (aa genotype). If each member of the pair is
equally likely to contribute a or A, then
$p = P\left( a\right) \cdot P\left( a\right) = \left( {.5}\right) \left( {.5}\right) = {.25}$
.

EXAMPLE 3.29 The pool of prospective jurors for a certain case consists
of 50 individuals, of whom 35 are employed. Suppose that 6 of these
individuals are randomly selected one by one to sit in the jury box for
initial questioning by lawyers for the defense and the prosecution.
Label the $i$ th person selected (the ${ith}$ trial) as a success $S$ if
he or she is employed and a failure $F$ otherwise. Then

$$P\left( {S\text{ on first trial }}\right) = \frac{35}{50} = {.70}$$

and

$$P\left( {S\text{ on second trial }}\right) = P\left( {SS}\right) + P\left( {FS}\right)$$

$$= P\left( {\text{ second }S \mid \text{ first }S}\right) P\left( {\text{ first }S}\right)$$

$$+ P\left( {\text{ second }S \mid \text{ first }F}\right) P\left( {\text{ first }F}\right)$$

$$= \frac{34}{49} \cdot \frac{35}{50} + \frac{35}{49} \cdot \frac{15}{50} = \frac{35}{50}\left( {\frac{34}{49} + \frac{15}{49}}\right) = \frac{35}{50} = {.70}$$

Similarly, it can be shown that
$P\left( {S\text{on}i\text{th trial}}\right) = {.70}$ for $i = 3,4,5,6$
. However, if the first five individuals selected are all $S$ , then
only ${30S}$ s remain for the sixth selection. Thus,

$$P\left( {S\text{ on sixth trial } \mid {SSSSS}}\right) = {30}/{45} = {.667}$$

whereas

$$P\left( {S\text{ on sixth trial } \mid {FFFFF}}\right) = {35}/{45} = {.778}$$

The experiment is not binomial because the trials are not independent.
In general, if sampling is without replacement, the experiment will not
yield independent trials.

Now consider a large county that has 500,000 individuals in its jury
pool, of whom 400,000 are employed. A sample of 10 individuals from the
pool is chosen without replacement. Again the $i$ th trial is regarded
as a success $S$ if the $i$ th individual is employed. The important
difference between this and the previous scenario is that the size of
the population being sampled is very large relative to the sample size.
In this case

$$P\left( {S\text{ on }2 \mid S\text{ on }1}\right) = \frac{{399},{999}}{{499},{999}} = {.8000}$$

and

$$P\left( {S\text{ on }{10} \mid S\text{ on first }9}\right) = \frac{{399},{991}}{{499},{991}} = {.799996} \approx {.8000}$$

$$P\left( {S\text{ on }{10} \mid F\text{ on first }9}\right) = \frac{{400},{000}}{{499},{991}} = {.800014} \approx {.8000}$$

These calculations suggest that although the trials are not exactly
independent, the conditional probabilities differ so slightly from one
another that for practical purposes the trials can be regarded as
independent with constant $P\left( S\right) = {.8}$ . Thus, to a very
good approximation, the experiment is binomial with $n = {10}$ and
$p = {.8}$ .

We will use the following rule of thumb in deciding whether a
\"without-replacement\" experiment can be treated as being binomial.

RULE Consider sampling without replacement from a dichotomous population
of size $N$ . If the sample size (number of trials) $n$ is at most $5\%$
of the population size, the experiment can be analyzed as though it were
a binomial experiment.

By \"analyzed,\" we mean that probabilities based on the binomial
experiment assumptions will be quite close to the actual
\"without-replacement\" probabilities, which are typically more
difficult to calculate. In the first scenario of Example 3.29,
$n/N = 6/{50} = {.12} > {.05}$ , so the binomial experiment is not a
good approximation, but in the second scenario,
$n/N = {10}/{500},{000} \ll {.05}$ .

## The Binomial Random Variable and Distribution

In most binomial experiments, it is the total number of $S$ 's, rather
than knowledge of exactly which trials yielded $S$ 's, that is of
interest.

::: mdframed
DEFINITION
:::

The binomial random variable $X$ associated with a binomial experiment
consisting of $n$ trials is defined as

$X =$ the number of $\mathrm{S}$ 's among the $n$ trials

Suppose, for example, that $n = 3$ . Then there are eight possible
outcomes for the experiment:

SSS SSF SFS SFF FSS FSF FFS FFF

From the definition of
$X,X\left( {SSF}\right) = 2,X\left( {SFF}\right) = 1$ , and so on.
Possible values for $X$ in an $n$ -trial experiment are
$x = 0,1,2,\ldots ,n$ . We will often write
$X \sim \operatorname{Bin}\left( {n,p}\right)$ to indicate that $X$ is a
binomial rv based on $n$ trials with success probability $p$ .

NOTATION Because the pmf of a binomial rv $X$ depends on the two
parameters $n$ and $p$ , we denote the pmf by $b\left( {x;n,p}\right)$ .

Consider first the case $n = 4$ for which each outcome, its probability,
and corresponding $x$ value are displayed in Table 3.1. For example,

$$P\left( {SSFS}\right) = P\left( S\right) \cdot P\left( S\right) \cdot P\left( F\right) \cdot P\left( S\right) \;\text{ (independent trials) }$$

$$= p \cdot p \cdot \left( {1 - p}\right) \cdot p\;\left( {\text{ constant }P\left( S\right) }\right)$$

$$= {p}^{3} \cdot \left( {1 - p}\right)$$

Table 3.1 Outcomes and Probabilities for a Binomial Experiment with Four
Trials

::: center
:::

In this special case, we wish $b\left( {x;4,p}\right)$ for $x = 0,1,2,3$
, and 4 . For $b\left( {3;4,p}\right)$ , let's identify which of the 16
outcomes yield an $x$ value of 3 and sum the probabilities associated
with each such outcome:

$$b\left( {3;4,p}\right) = P\left( {FSSS}\right) + P\left( {SFSS}\right) + P\left( {SSFS}\right) + P\left( {SSSF}\right) = 4{p}^{3}\left( {1 - p}\right)$$

There are four outcomes with $X = 3$ and each has probability
${p}^{3}\left( {1 - p}\right)$ (the order of $S$ 's and $F$ 's is not
important, only the number of $S$ 's), so

$$b\left( {3;4,p}\right) = \left\{ \begin{array}{l} \text{ number of outcomes } \\ \text{ with }X = 3 \end{array}\right\} \cdot \left\{ \begin{array}{l} \text{ probability of any particular } \\ \text{ outcome with }X = 3 \end{array}\right\}$$

Similarly, $b\left( {2;4,p}\right) = 6{p}^{2}{\left( 1 - p\right) }^{2}$
, which is also the product of the number of outcomes with $X = 2$ and
the probability of any such outcome.

In general,

$$b\left( {x;n,p}\right) = \left\{ \begin{array}{l} \text{ number of sequences of } \\ \text{ length }n\text{ consisting of }x{S}^{\prime }\mathrm{s} \end{array}\right\} \cdot \left\{ \begin{array}{l} \text{ probability of any } \\ \text{ particular such sequence } \end{array}\right\}$$

Since the ordering of $S$ 's and $F$ 's is not important, the second
factor in the previous equation is
${p}^{x}{\left( 1 - p\right) }^{n - x}$ (e.g., the first $x$ trials
resulting in $S$ and the last $n - x$ resulting in $F$ ). The first
factor is the number of ways of choosing $x$ of the $n$ trials to be $S$
's-that is, the number of combinations of size $x$ that can be
constructed from $n$ distinct objects (trials here).

$$b\left( {x;n,p}\right) = \left\{ \begin{matrix} \left( \begin{array}{l} n \\ x \end{array}\right) {p}^{x}{\left( 1 - p\right) }^{n - x} & x = 0,1,2,\ldots ,n \\ 0 & \text{ otherwise } \end{matrix}\right.$$

EXAMPLE 3.30 Each of six randomly selected cola drinkers is given a
glass containing cola $S$ and one containing cola $F$ . The glasses are
identical in appearance except for a code on the bottom to identify the
cola. Suppose there is actually no tendency among cola drinkers to
prefer one cola to the other. Then $p = P$ (a selected individual
prefers $S$ ) $= {.5}$ , so with $X =$ the number among the six who
prefer $S,X \sim \operatorname{Bin}\left( {6,{.5}}\right)$ .

Thus

$$P\left( {X = 3}\right) = b\left( {3;6,{.5}}\right) = \left( \begin{array}{l} 6 \\ 3 \end{array}\right) {\left( {.5}\right) }^{3}{\left( {.5}\right) }^{3} = {20}{\left( {.5}\right) }^{6} = {.313}$$

The probability that at least three prefer $S$ is

$$P\left( {3 \leq X}\right) = \mathop{\sum }\limits_{{x = 3}}^{6}b\left( {x;6,{.5}}\right) = \mathop{\sum }\limits_{{x = 3}}^{6}\left( \begin{array}{l} 6 \\ x \end{array}\right) {\left( {.5}\right) }^{x}{\left( {.5}\right) }^{6 - x} = {.656}$$

and the probability that at most one prefers $S$ is

$$P\left( {X \leq 1}\right) = \mathop{\sum }\limits_{{x = 0}}^{1}b\left( {x;6,{.5}}\right) = {.109}$$

## Using Binomial Tables

Even for a relatively small value of $n$ , the computation of binomial
probabilities can be tedious. Appendix Table A. 1 tabulates the cdf
$F\left( x\right) = P\left( {X \leq x}\right)$ for
$n = 5,{10},{15},{20},{25}$ in combination with selected values of $p$
corresponding to different columns of the table. Various other
probabilities can then be calculated using the proposition on cdf's from
Section 3.2. A table entry of 0 signifies only that the probability is 0
to three significant digits since all table entries are actually
positive.

NOTATION For $X \sim \operatorname{Bin}\left( {n,p}\right)$ , the cdf
will be denoted by

$$B\left( {x;n,p}\right) = P\left( {X \leq x}\right) = \mathop{\sum }\limits_{{y = 0}}^{x}b\left( {y;n,p}\right) \;x = 0,1,\ldots ,n$$

EXAMPLE 3.31 Suppose that ${20}\%$ of all copies of a particular
textbook fail a certain binding strength test. Let $X$ denote the number
among 15 randomly selected copies that fail the test. Then $X$ has a
binomial distribution with $n = {15}$ and $p = {.2}$ .

1\. The probability that at most 8 fail the test is

$$P\left( {X \leq 8}\right) = \mathop{\sum }\limits_{{y = 0}}^{8}b\left( {y;{15},{.2}}\right) = B\left( {8;{15},{.2}}\right)$$

which is the entry in the $x = 8$ row and the $p = {.2}$ column of the
$n = {15}$ binomial table. From Appendix Table A.1, the probability is
$B\left( {8;{15},{.2}}\right) = {.999}$ .

2\. The probability that exactly 8 fail is

$$P\left( {X = 8}\right) = P\left( {X \leq 8}\right) - P\left( {X \leq 7}\right) = B\left( {8;{15},{.2}}\right) - B\left( {7;{15},{.2}}\right)$$

which is the difference between two consecutive entries in the
$p = {.2}$ column. The result is ${.999} - {.996} = {.003}$ .

\* Statistical software packages such as Minitab and R will provide the
pmf or cdf almost instantaneously upon request for any value of $p$ and
$n$ ranging from 2 up into the millions. There is also an $\mathrm{R}$
command for calculating the probability that $X$ lies in some interval.

3\. The probability that at least 8 fail is

$$P\left( {X \geq 8}\right) = 1 - P\left( {X \leq 7}\right) = 1 - B\left( {7;{15},{.2}}\right)$$

$$= 1 - \left( \begin{array}{l} \text{ entry in }x = 7 \\ \text{ row of }p = {.2}\text{ column } \end{array}\right)$$

$$= 1 - {.996} = {.004}$$

4\. Finally, the probability that between 4 and 7, inclusive, fail is

$$P\left( {4 \leq X \leq 7}\right) = P\left( {X = 4,5,6,\text{ or }7}\right) = P\left( {X \leq 7}\right) - P\left( {X \leq 3}\right)$$

$$= B\left( {7;{15},{.2}}\right) - B\left( {3;{15},{.2}}\right) = {.996} - {.648} = {.348}$$

Notice that this latter probability is the difference between entries in
the $x = 7$ and $x = 3$ rows, not the $x = 7$ and $x = 4$ rows.

EXAMPLE 3.32 An electronics manufacturer claims that at most ${10}\%$ of
its power supply units need service during the warranty period. To
investigate this claim, technicians at a testing laboratory purchase 20
units and subject each one to accelerated testing to simulate use during
the warranty period. Let $p$ denote the probability that a power supply
unit needs repair during the period (the proportion of all such units
that need repair). The laboratory technicians must decide whether the
data resulting from the experiment supports the claim that
$p \leq {.10}$ . Let $X$ denote the number among the 20 sampled that
need repair, so $X \sim \operatorname{Bin}\left( {{20},p}\right)$ .
Consider the decision rule:

Reject the claim that $p \leq {.10}$ in favor of the conclusion that
$p > {.10}$ if $x \geq 5$

(where $x$ is the observed value of $X$ ), and consider the claim
plausible if $x \leq 4$ .

The probability that the claim is rejected when $p = {.10}$ (an
incorrect conclusion) is

$$P\left( {X \geq 5\text{when}p = {.10}}\right) = 1 - B\left( {4;{20},{.1}}\right) = 1 - {.957} = {.043}$$

The probability that the claim is not rejected when $p = {.20}$ (a
different type of incorrect conclusion) is

$$P\left( {X \leq 4\text{when}p = {.2}}\right) = B\left( {4;{20},{.2}}\right) = {.630}$$

The first probability is rather small, but the second is intolerably
large. When $p = {.20}$ , so that the manufacturer has grossly
understated the percentage of units that need service, and the stated
decision rule is used, ${63}\%$ of all samples will result in the
manufacturer's claim being judged plausible!

One might think that the probability of this second type of erroneous
conclusion could be made smaller by changing the cutoff value 5 in the
decision rule to something else. However, although replacing 5 by a
smaller number would yield a probability smaller than .630 , the other
probability would then increase. The only way to make both \"error
probabilities\" small is to base the decision rule on an experiment
involving many more units.

## The Mean and Variance of $X$

For $n = 1$ , the binomial distribution becomes the Bernoulli
distribution. From Example 3.18, the mean value of a Bernoulli variable
is $\mu = p$ , so the expected number of $S$ 's on any single trial is
$p$ . Since a binomial experiment consists of $n$ trials, intuition
suggests that for
$X \sim \operatorname{Bin}\left( {n,p}\right) ,E\left( X\right) = {np}$
, the product of the number of trials and the probability of success on
a single trial. The expression for $V\left( X\right)$ is not so
intuitive.

PROPOSITION If $X \sim \operatorname{Bin}\left( {n,p}\right)$ , then
$E\left( X\right) = {np},V\left( X\right) = {np}\left( {1 - p}\right) = {npq}$
, and ${\sigma }_{X} = \sqrt{npq}$

(where $q = 1 - p$ ).

Thus, calculating the mean and variance of a binomial rv does not
necessitate evaluating summations. The proof of the result for
$E\left( X\right)$ is sketched in Exercise 64.

If ${75}\%$ of all purchases at a certain store are made with a credit
card and $X$ is the number among ten randomly selected purchases made
with a credit card, then
$X \sim \operatorname{Bin}\left( {{10},{.75}}\right)$ . Thus
$E\left( X\right) = {np} = \left( {10}\right) \left( {.75}\right) = {7.5},V\left( X\right) = {npq} = {10}\left( {.75}\right) \left( {.25}\right) =$
1.875, and $\sigma = \sqrt{1.875} = {1.37}$ . Again, even though $X$ can
take on only integer values, $E\left( X\right)$ need not be an integer.
If we perform a large number of independent binomial experiments, each
with $n = {10}$ trials and $p = {.75}$ , then the average number of $S$
's per experiment will be close to 7.5 .

The probability that $X$ is within 1 standard deviation of its mean
value is
$P\left( {{7.5} - {1.37} \leq X \leq {7.5} + {1.37}}\right) = P\left( {{6.13} \leq X \leq {8.87}}\right) = P\left( {X = 7\text{or 8}}\right) = {.532}$
## EXERCISES Section 3.4 (46-67)

46\. Compute the following binomial probabilities directly from the
formula for $b\left( {x;n,p}\right)$ :

a\. $b\left( {3;8,{.35}}\right)$

b\. $b\left( {5;8,{.6}}\right)$

c\. $P\left( {3 \leq X \leq 5}\right)$ when $n = 7$ and $p = {.6}$

d\. $P\left( {1 \leq X}\right)$ when $n = 9$ and $p = {.1}$

47\. The article \"Should You Report That Fender-Bender?\" (Consumer
Reports, Sept. 2013: 15) reported that 7 in 10 auto accidents involve a
single vehicle (the article recommended always reporting to the
insurance company an accident involving multiple vehicles). Suppose 15
accidents are randomly selected. Use Appendix Table A. 1 to answer each
of the following questions.

a\. What is the probability that at most 4 involve a single vehicle?

b\. What is the probability that exactly 4 involve a single vehicle?

c\. What is the probability that exactly 6 involve multiple vehicles?

d\. What is the probability that between 2 and 4 , inclusive, involve a
single vehicle?

e\. What is the probability that at least 2 involve a single vehicle?

f\. What is the probability that exactly 4 involve a single vehicle and
the other 11 involve multiple vehicles?

48\. NBC News reported on May 2, 2013, that 1 in 20 children in the
United States have a food allergy of some sort. Consider selecting a
random sample of 25 children and let $X$ be the number in the sample who
have a food allergy. Then
$X \sim \operatorname{Bin}\left( {{25},{.05}}\right)$ .

a\. Determine both $P\left( {X \leq 3}\right)$ and
$P\left( {X < 3}\right)$ .

b\. Determine $P\left( {X \geq 4}\right)$ .

c\. Determine $P\left( {1 \leq X \leq 3}\right)$ .

d\. What are $E\left( X\right)$ and ${\sigma }_{X}$ ?

e\. In a sample of 50 children, what is the probability that none has a
food allergy?

49\. A company that produces fine crystal knows from experience that
${10}\%$ of its goblets have cosmetic flaws and must be classified as
\"seconds.\"

a\. Among six randomly selected goblets, how likely is it that only one
is a second?

b\. Among six randomly selected goblets, what is the probability that at
least two are seconds?

c\. If goblets are examined one by one, what is the probability that at
most five must be selected to find four that are not seconds?

50\. A particular telephone number is used to receive both voice calls
and fax messages. Suppose that ${25}\%$ of the incoming calls involve
fax messages, and consider a sample of 25 incoming calls. What is the
probability that

a\. At most 6 of the calls involve a fax message?

b\. Exactly 6 of the calls involve a fax message?

c\. At least 6 of the calls involve a fax message?

d\. More than 6 of the calls involve a fax message?

51\. Refer to the previous exercise.

a\. What is the expected number of calls among the 25 that involve a fax
message?

b\. What is the standard deviation of the number among the 25 calls that
involve a fax message?

c\. What is the probability that the number of calls among the 25 that
involve a fax transmission exceeds the expected number by more than 2
standard deviations?

52\. Suppose that ${30}\%$ of all students who have to buy a text for a
particular course want a new copy (the successes!), whereas the other
${70}\%$ want a used copy. Consider randomly selecting 25 purchasers.

a\. What are the mean value and standard deviation of the number who
want a new copy of the book?

b\. What is the probability that the number who want new copies is more
than two standard deviations away from the mean value?

c\. The bookstore has 15 new copies and 15 used copies in stock. If 25
people come in one by one to purchase this text, what is the probability
that all 25 will get the type of book they want from current stock?
\[Hint: Let $X =$ the number who want a new copy. For what values of $X$
will all 25 get what they want?\]

d\. Suppose that new copies cost $\$ {100}$ and used copies cost \$70.
Assume the bookstore currently has 50 new copies and 50 used copies.
What is the expected value of total revenue from the sale of the next 25
copies purchased? Be sure to indicate what rule of expected value you
are using. \[Hint: Let $h\left( X\right) =$ the revenue when $X$ of the
25 purchasers want new copies. Express this as a linear function.\]

53\. Exercise 30 (Section 3.3) gave the pmf of $Y$ , the number of
traffic citations for a randomly selected individual insured by a
particular company. What is the probability that among 15 randomly
chosen such individuals

a\. At least 10 have no citations?

b\. Fewer than half have at least one citation?

c\. The number that have at least one citation is between 5 and 10,
inclusive?\*

54\. A particular type of tennis racket comes in a midsize version and
an oversize version. Sixty percent of all customers at a certain store
want the oversize version.

a\. Among ten randomly selected customers who want this type of racket,
what is the probability that at least six want the oversize version?

b\. Among ten randomly selected customers, what is the probability that
the number who want the oversize

\* \"Between $a$ and $b$ , inclusive\" is equivalent to
$\left( {a \leq X \leq b}\right)$ . version is within 1 standard
deviation of the mean value?

c\. The store currently has seven rackets of each version. What is the
probability that all of the next ten customers who want this racket can
get the version they want from current stock?

55\. Twenty percent of all telephones of a certain type are submitted
for service while under warranty. Of these, ${60}\%$ can be repaired,
whereas the other ${40}\%$ must be replaced with new units. If a company
purchases ten of these telephones, what is the probability that exactly
two will end up being replaced under warranty?

56\. The College Board reports that $2\%$ of the 2 million high school
students who take the SAT each year receive special accommodations
because of documented disabilities (Los Angeles Times, July 16, 2002).
Consider a random sample of 25 students who have recently taken the
test.

a\. What is the probability that exactly 1 received a special
accommodation?

b\. What is the probability that at least 1 received a special
accommodation?

c\. What is the probability that at least 2 received a special
accommodation?

d\. What is the probability that the number among the 25 who received a
special accommodation is within 2 standard deviations of the number you
would expect to be accommodated?

e\. Suppose that a student who does not receive a special accommodation
is allowed 3 hours for the exam, whereas an accommodated student is
allowed 4.5 hours. What would you expect the average time allowed the 25
selected students to be?

57\. A certain type of flashlight requires two type-D batteries, and the
flashlight will work only if both its batteries have acceptable
voltages. Suppose that ${90}\%$ of all batteries from a certain supplier
have acceptable voltages. Among ten randomly selected flashlights, what
is the probability that at least nine will work? What assumptions did
you make in the course of answering the question posed?

58\. A very large batch of components has arrived at a distributor. The
batch can be characterized as acceptable only if the proportion of
defective components is at most .10. The distributor decides to randomly
select 10 components and to accept the batch only if the number of
defective components in the sample is at most 2 .

a\. What is the probability that the batch will be accepted when the
actual proportion of defectives is .01?.05? .10? .20? .25?

b\. Let $p$ denote the actual proportion of defectives in the batch. A
graph of $P$ (batch is accepted) as a function of $p$ , with $p$ on the
horizontal axis and $P$ (batch is accepted) on the vertical axis, is
called the operating characteristic curve for the acceptance sampling
plan. Use the results of part (a) to sketch this curve for
$0 \leq p \leq 1$ .

c\. Repeat parts (a) and (b) with \" 1 \" replacing \" 2 \" in the
acceptance sampling plan.

d\. Repeat parts (a) and (b) with \"15\" replacing \"10\" in the
acceptance sampling plan.

e\. Which of the three sampling plans, that of part (a), (c), or (d),
appears most satisfactory, and why?

59\. An ordinance requiring that a smoke detector be installed in all
previously constructed houses has been in effect in a particular city
for 1 year. The fire department is concerned that many houses remain
without detectors. Let $p =$ the true proportion of such houses having
detectors, and suppose that a random sample of 25 homes is inspected. If
the sample strongly indicates that fewer than ${80}\%$ of all houses
have a detector, the fire department will campaign for a mandatory
inspection program. Because of the costliness of the program, the
department prefers not to call for such inspections unless sample
evidence strongly argues for their necessity. Let $X$ denote the number
of homes with detectors among the 25 sampled. Consider rejecting the
claim that $p \geq {.8}$ if $x \leq {15}$ .

a\. What is the probability that the claim is rejected when the actual
value of $p$ is . 8 ?

b\. What is the probability of not rejecting the claim when $p = {.7}$ ?
When $p = {.6}$ ?

c\. How do the \"error probabilities\" of parts (a) and (b) change if
the value 15 in the decision rule is replaced by 14 ?

60\. A toll bridge charges $\$ {1.00}$ for passenger cars and
$\$ {2.50}$ for other vehicles. Suppose that during daytime hours,
${60}\%$ of all vehicles are passenger cars. If 25 vehicles cross the
bridge during a particular daytime period, what is the resulting
expected toll revenue? \[Hint: Let $X =$ the number of passenger cars;
then the toll revenue $h\left( X\right)$ is a linear function of $X$ .\]

61\. A student who is trying to write a paper for a course has a choice
of two topics, A and B. If topic A is chosen, the student will order two
books through interlibrary loan, whereas if topic B is chosen, the
student will order four books. The student believes that a good paper
necessitates receiving and using at least half the books ordered for
either topic chosen. If the probability that a book ordered through
interlibrary loan actually arrives in time is .9 and books arrive
independently of one another, which topic should the student choose to
maximize the probability of writing a good paper? What if the arrival
probability is only . 5 instead of .9 ?

62\. a. For fixed $n$ , are there values of
$p\left( {0 \leq p \leq 1}\right)$ for which $V\left( X\right) = 0$ ?
Explain why this is so.

b\. For what value of $p$ is $V\left( X\right)$ maximized? \[Hint:
Either graph $V\left( X\right)$ as a function of $p$ or else take a
derivative.\]

63\. a. Show that
$b\left( {x;n,1 - p}\right) = b\left( {n - x;n,p}\right)$ .

b\. Show that
$B\left( {x;n,1 - p}\right) = 1 - B\left( {n - x - 1;n,p}\right)$ .
\[Hint: At most ${xS}$ 's is equivalent to at least
$\left( {n - x}\right)$ $F$ s.\]

c\. What do parts (a) and (b) imply about the necessity of including
values of $p$ greater than .5 in Appendix Table A.1?

64\. Show that $E\left( X\right) = {np}$ when $X$ is a binomial random
variable. \[Hint: First express $E\left( X\right)$ as a sum with lower
limit $x = 1$ . Then factor out ${np}$ , let $y = x - 1$ so that the sum
is from $y = 0$ to $y = n - 1$ , and show that the sum equals 1.\]

65\. Customers at a gas station pay with a credit card $\left( A\right)$
, debit card $\left( B\right)$ , or cash $\left( C\right)$ . Assume that
successive customers make independent choices, with
$P\left( A\right) = {.5}$ , $P\left( B\right) = {.2}$ , and
$P\left( C\right) = {.3}$ .

a\. Among the next 100 customers, what are the mean and variance of the
number who pay with a debit card? Explain your reasoning.

b\. Answer part (a) for the number among the 100 who don't pay with
cash.

66\. An airport limousine can accommodate up to four passengers on any
one trip. The company will accept a maximum of six reservations for a
trip, and a passenger must have a reservation. From previous records,
${20}\%$ of all those making reservations do not appear for the trip.
Answer the following questions, assuming independence wherever
appropriate.

a\. If six reservations are made, what is the probability that at least
one individual with a reservation cannot be accommodated on the trip?

b\. If six reservations are made, what is the expected number of
available places when the limousine departs?

c\. Suppose the probability distribution of the number of reservations
made is given in the accompanying table.

::: center
:::

Let $X$ denote the number of passengers on a randomly selected trip.
Obtain the probability mass function of $X$ .

67\. Refer to Chebyshev's inequality given in Exercise 44. Calculate
$P\left( {\left| {X - \mu }\right| \geq {k\sigma }}\right)$ for $k = 2$
and $k = 3$ when $X \sim \operatorname{Bin}\left( {{20},{.5}}\right)$ ,
and compare to the corresponding upper bound. Repeat for
$X \sim \operatorname{Bin}\left( {{20},{.75}}\right)$ .