# 3.5 Hypergeometric and Negative Binomial Distributions 

The hypergeometric and negative binomial distributions are both related
to the binomial distribution. The binomial distribution is the
approximate probability model for sampling without replacement from a
finite dichotomous $\left( {S - F}\right)$ population provided the
sample size $n$ is small relative to the population size $N$ ; the
hypergeometric distribution is the exact probability model for the
number of $S$ 's in the sample. The binomial rv $X$ is the number of $S$
's when the number $n$ of trials is fixed, whereas the negative binomial
distribution arises from fixing the number of $S$ 's desired and letting
the number of trials be random.

## The Hypergeometric Distribution 


The assumptions leading to the hypergeometric distribution are as
follows:

1\. The population or set to be sampled consists of $N$ individuals,
objects, or elements (a finite population).

2\. Each individual can be characterized as a success $\left( S\right)$
or a failure $\left( F\right)$ , and there are $M$ successes in the
population.

3\. A sample of $n$ individuals is selected without replacement in such
a way that each subset of size $n$ is equally likely to be chosen.

The random variable of interest is $X =$ the number of $S$ 's in the
sample. The probability distribution of $X$ depends on the parameters
$n,M$ , and $N$ , so we wish to obtain
$P\left( {X = x}\right) = h\left( {x;n,M,N}\right)$ .

EXAMPLE 3.34 During a particular period a university's information
technology office received 20 service orders for problems with printers,
of which 8 were laser printers and 12 were inkjet models. A sample of 5
of these service orders is to be selected for inclusion in a customer
satisfaction survey. Suppose that the 5 are selected in a completely
random fashion, so that any particular subset of size 5 has the same
chance of being selected as does any other subset. What then is the
probability that exactly $x\left( {x = 0,1,2,3,4\text{,or 5}}\right)$ of
the selected service orders were for inkjet printers?

Here, the population size is $N = {20}$ , the sample size is $n = 5$ ,
and the number of $S$ 's (inkjet $= S$ ) and $F$ 's in the population
are $M = {12}$ and $N - M = 8$ , respectively. Consider the value
$x = 2$ . Because all outcomes (each consisting of 5 particular orders)
are equally likely,

$$P\left( {X = 2}\right) = h\left( {2;5,{12},{20}}\right) = \frac{\text{ number of outcomes having }X = 2}{\text{ number of possible outcomes }}$$

The number of possible outcomes in the experiment is the number of ways
of selecting 5 from the 20 service orders without regard to order-that
is, $\left( \begin{matrix} {20} \\ 5 \end{matrix}\right)$ . To count the
number of outcomes having $X = 2$ , note that there are
$\left( \begin{matrix} {12} \\ 2 \end{matrix}\right)$ ways of selecting
2 of the inkjet orders, and for each such way there are
$\left( \begin{array}{l} 8 \\ 3 \end{array}\right)$ ways of selecting
the 3 laser orders to fill out the sample. The product rule from Chapter
2 then gives
$\left( \begin{matrix} {12} \\ 2 \end{matrix}\right) \left( \begin{array}{l} 8 \\ 3 \end{array}\right)$
as the number of outcomes with $X = 2$ , so

$$h\left( {2;5,{12},{20}}\right) = \frac{\left( \begin{matrix} {12} \\ 2 \end{matrix}\right) \left( \begin{array}{l} 8 \\ 3 \end{array}\right) }{\left( \begin{matrix} {20} \\ 5 \end{matrix}\right) } = \frac{77}{323} = {.238}$$

In general, if the sample size $n$ is smaller than the number of
successes in the population $\left( M\right)$ , then the largest
possible $X$ value is $n$ . However, if $M < n$ (e.g., a sample size of
25 and only 15 successes in the population), then $X$ can be at most $M$
. Similarly, whenever the number of population failures
$\left( {N - M}\right)$ exceeds the sample size, the smallest possible
$X$ value is 0 (since all sampled individuals might then be failures).
However, if $N - M < n$ , the smallest possible $X$ value is
$n - \left( {N - M}\right)$ . Thus, the possible values of $X$ satisfy
the restriction
$\max \left( {0,n - \left( {N - M}\right) }\right) \leq x \leq \min \left( {n,M}\right)$
. An argument parallel to that of the previous example gives the pmf of
$X$ .

::: mdframed
PROPOSITION
:::

If $X$ is the number of $S$ 's in a completely random sample of size $n$
drawn from a population consisting of ${MS}$ 's and
$\left( {N - M}\right) F$ 's, then the probability distribution of $X$ ,
called the hypergeometric distribution, is given by

$$P\left( {X = x}\right) = h\left( {x;n,M,N}\right) = \frac{\left( \begin{matrix} M \\ x \end{matrix}\right) \left( \begin{matrix} N - M \\ n - x \end{matrix}\right) }{\left( \begin{matrix} N \\ n \end{matrix}\right) } \tag{3.15}$$

for $x$ an integer satisfying
$\max \left( {0,n - N + M}\right) \leq x \leq \min \left( {n,M}\right)$
.

In Example 3.34, $n = 5,M = {12}$ , and $N = {20}$ , so
$h\left( {x;5,{12},{20}}\right)$ for $x = 0,1,2$ , 3, 4, 5 can be
obtained by substituting these numbers into Equation (3.15).

5 Five individuals from an animal population thought to be near
extinction in a certain region have been caught, tagged, and released to
mix into the population. After they have had an opportunity to mix, a
random sample of 10 of these animals is selected. Let $X =$ the number
of tagged animals in the second sample. Suppose there are actually 25
animals of this type in the region.

The parameter values are $n = {10},M = 5$ (5 tagged animals in the
population), and $N = {25}$ , so the pmf of $X$ is

$$h\left( {x;{10},5,{25}}\right) = \frac{\left( \begin{array}{l} 5 \\ x \end{array}\right) \left( \begin{matrix} {20} \\ {10} - x \end{matrix}\right) }{\left( \begin{array}{l} {25} \\ {10} \end{array}\right) }\;x = 0,1,2,3,4,5$$

The probability that exactly two of the animals in the second sample are
tagged is

$$P\left( {X = 2}\right) = h\left( {2;{10},5,{25}}\right) = \frac{\left( \begin{array}{l} 5 \\ 2 \end{array}\right) \left( \begin{matrix} {20} \\ 8 \end{matrix}\right) }{\left( \begin{array}{l} {25} \\ {10} \end{array}\right) } = {.385}$$

The probability that at most two of the animals in the recapture sample
are tagged is

$$P\left( {X \leq 2}\right) = P\left( {X = 0,1,\text{ or }2}\right) = \mathop{\sum }\limits_{{x = 0}}^{2}h\left( {x;{10},5,{25}}\right)$$

$$= {.057} + {.257} + {.385} = {.699}$$

Various statistical software packages will easily generate
hypergeometric probabilities (tabulation is cumbersome because of the
three parameters).

As in the binomial case, there are simple expressions for
$E\left( X\right)$ and $V\left( X\right)$ for hypergeometric rv's.

::: mdframed
PROPOSITION
:::

The mean and variance of the hypergeometric rv $X$ having pmf
$h\left( {x;n,M,N}\right)$ are

$$E\left( X\right) = n \cdot \frac{M}{N}\;V\left( X\right) = \left( \frac{N - n}{N - 1}\right) \cdot n \cdot \frac{M}{N} \cdot \left( {1 - \frac{M}{N}}\right)$$

The ratio $M/N$ is the proportion of $S$ 's in the population. Replacing
$M/N$ by $p$ in $E\left( X\right)$ and $V\left( X\right)$ gives

$$E\left( X\right) = {np}$$

$$V\left( X\right) = \left( \frac{N - n}{N - 1}\right) \cdot {np}\left( {1 - p}\right) \tag{3.16}$$

Expression (3.16) shows that the means of the binomial and
hypergeometric rv's are equal, whereas the variances of the two rv's
differ by the factor $\left( {N - n}\right) /\left( {N - 1}\right)$ ,
often called the finite population correction factor. This factor is
less than 1 , so the hypergeometric variable has smaller variance than
does the binomial rv. The correction factor can be written as
$\left( {1 - n/N}\right) /\left( {1 - 1/N}\right)$ , which is
approximately 1 when $n$ is small relative to $N$ .

::: mdframed
EXAMPLE 3.36

(Example 3.35

continued)
:::

In the animal-tagging example, $n = {10},M = 5$ , and $N = {25}$ , so
$p = 5/{25} = {.2}$ and

$$E\left( X\right) = {10}\left( {.2}\right) = 2$$

$$V\left( X\right) = \frac{15}{24}\left( {10}\right) \left( {.2}\right) \left( {.8}\right) = \left( {.625}\right) \left( {1.6}\right) = 1$$

If the sampling had been carried out with replacement,
$V\left( X\right) = {1.6}$ .

Suppose the population size $N$ is not actually known, so the value $x$
is observed and we wish to estimate $N$ . It is reasonable to equate the
observed sample proportion of $S$ 's, $x/n$ , with the population
proportion, $M/N$ , giving the estimate

$$\widehat{N} = \frac{M \cdot n}{x}$$

$$\text{If}M = {100},n = {40}\text{,and}x = {16}\text{,then}\widehat{N} = {250}\text{.}$$

Our general rule of thumb in Section 3.4 stated that if sampling was
without replacement but $n/N$ was at most .05, then the binomial
distribution could be used to compute approximate probabilities
involving the number of $S$ 's in the sample. A more precise statement
is as follows: Let the population size, $N$ , and number of population
$S$ 's, $M$ , get large with the ratio $M/N$ approaching $p$ . Then
$h\left( {x;n,M,N}\right)$ approaches $b\left( {x;n,p}\right)$ ; so for
$n/N$ small, the two are approximately equal provided that $p$ is not
too near either 0 or 1 . This is the rationale for the rule.

## The Negative Binomial Distribution

The negative binomial rv and distribution are based on an experiment
satisfying the following conditions:

1\. The experiment consists of a sequence of independent trials.

2\. Each trial can result in either a success $\left( S\right)$ or a
failure $\left( F\right)$ .

3\. The probability of success is constant from trial to trial, so
$P\left( {S\text{on trial}i}\right) = p$ for $i = 1,2,3,\ldots$ .

4\. The experiment continues (trials are performed) until a total of $r$
successes have been observed, where $r$ is a specified positive integer.

The random variable of interest is $X =$ the number of failures that
precede the $r$ th success; $X$ is called a negative binomial random
variable because, in contrast to the binomial rv, the number of
successes is fixed and the number of trials is random.

Possible values of $X$ are $0,1,2,\ldots$ . Let
${nb}\left( {x;r;p}\right)$ denote the pmf of $X$ . Consider
${nb}\left( {7;3,p}\right) = P\left( {X = 7}\right)$ , the probability
that exactly $7\mathrm{F}$ 's occur before the ${3}^{\text{rd }}S$ . In
order for this to happen, the ${10}^{\text{th }}$ trial must be an $S$
and there must be exactly 2 S's among the first 9 trials. Thus

$${nb}\left( {7;3,p}\right) = \left\{ {\left( \begin{array}{l} 9 \\ 2 \end{array}\right) \cdot {p}^{2}{\left( 1 - p\right) }^{7}}\right\} \cdot p = \left( \begin{array}{l} 9 \\ 2 \end{array}\right) \cdot {p}^{3}{\left( 1 - p\right) }^{7}$$

Generalizing this line of reasoning gives the following formula for the
negative binomial pmf.

PROPOSITION

The pmf of the negative binomial rv $X$ with parameters $r =$ number of
$S$ 's and

$p = P\left( S\right)$ is

$${nb}\left( {x;r,p}\right) = \left( \begin{matrix} x + r - 1 \\ r - 1 \end{matrix}\right) {p}^{r}{\left( 1 - p\right) }^{x}\;x = 0,1,2,\ldots$$

EXAMPLE 3.37 A pediatrician wishes to recruit 5 couples, each of whom is
expecting their first child, to participate in a new natural childbirth
regimen. Let $p = P$ (a randomly selected couple agrees to participate).
If $p = {.2}$ , what is the probability that 15 couples must be asked
before 5 are found who agree to participate? That is, with $S = \{$
agrees to participate $\}$ , what is the probability that ${10F}$ 's
occur before the fifth $S$ ? Substituting $r = 5,p = {.2}$ , and
$x = {10}$ into ${nb}\left( {x;r;p}\right)$ gives

$${nb}\left( {{10};5,{.2}}\right) = \left( \begin{matrix} {14} \\ 4 \end{matrix}\right) {\left( {.2}\right) }^{5}{\left( {.8}\right) }^{10} = {.034}$$

The probability that at most ${10}\mathrm{F}$ 's are observed (at most
15 couples are asked) is

$$P\left( {X \leq {10}}\right) = \mathop{\sum }\limits_{{x = 0}}^{{10}}{nb}\left( {x;5,{.2}}\right) = {\left( {.2}\right) }^{5}\mathop{\sum }\limits_{{x = 0}}^{{10}}\left( \begin{matrix} x + 4 \\ 4 \end{matrix}\right) {\left( {.8}\right) }^{x} = {.164}$$

In some sources, the negative binomial rv is taken to be the number of
trials $X + r$ rather than the number of failures.

In the special case $r = 1$ , the pmf is

$${nb}\left( {x;1,p}\right) = {\left( 1 - p\right) }^{x}p\;x = 0,1,2,\ldots \tag{3.17}$$

In Example 3.12, we derived the pmf for the number of trials necessary
to obtain the first $S$ , and the pmf there is similar to Expression
(3.17). Both $X =$ number of $F$ 's and $Y =$ number of trials
$\left( { = 1 + X}\right)$ are referred to in the literature as
geometric random variables, and the pmf in Expression (3.17) is called
the geometric distribution.

The expected number of trials until the first $S$ was shown in Example
3.19 to be $1/p$ , so that the expected number of $F$ 's until the first
$S$ is $\left( {1/p}\right) - 1 = \left( {1 - p}\right) /p$ .
Intuitively, we would expect to see
$r \cdot \left( {1 - p}\right) /{pF}$ 's before the $r$ th $S$ , and
this is indeed $E\left( X\right)$ . There is also a simple formula for
$V\left( X\right)$ .

PROPOSITION If $X$ is a negative binomial rv with
$\operatorname{pmf}{nb}\left( {x;r,p}\right)$ , then

$$E\left( X\right) = \frac{r\left( {1 - p}\right) }{p}\;V\left( X\right) = \frac{r\left( {1 - p}\right) }{{p}^{2}}$$

Finally, by expanding the binomial coefficient in front of
${p}^{r}{\left( 1 - p\right) }^{x}$ and doing some cancellation, it can
be seen that ${nb}\left( {x;r;p}\right)$ is well defined even when $r$
is not an integer. This generalized negative binomial distribution has
been found to fit observed data quite well in a wide variety of
applications.

## EXERCISES Section 3.5 (68--78) 

68\. Eighteen individuals are scheduled to take a driving test at a
particular DMV office on a certain day, eight of whom will be taking the
test for the first time. Suppose that six of these individuals are
randomly assigned to a particular examiner, and let $X$ be the number
among the six who are taking the test for the first time.

a\. What kind of a distribution does $X$ have (name and values of all
parameters)?

b\. Compute $P\left( {X = 2}\right) ,P\left( {X \leq 2}\right)$ , and
$P\left( {X \geq 2}\right)$ .

c\. Calculate the mean value and standard deviation of $X$ .

69\. Each of 12 refrigerators of a certain type has been returned to a
distributor because of an audible, high-pitched, oscillating noise when
the refrigerators are running. Suppose that 7 of these refrigerators
have a defective compressor and the other 5 have less serious problems.
If the refrigerators are examined in random order, let $X$ be the number
among the first 6 examined that have a defective compressor.

a\. Calculate $P\left( {X = 4}\right)$ and $P\left( {X \leq 4}\right)$

b\. Determine the probability that $X$ exceeds its mean value by more
than 1 standard deviation.

c\. Consider a large shipment of 400 refrigerators, of which 40 have
defective compressors. If $X$ is the number among 15 randomly selected
refrigerators that have defective compressors, describe a less tedious
way to calculate (at least approximately) $P\left( {X \leq 5}\right)$
than to use the hypergeometric pmf.

70\. An instructor who taught two sections of engineering statistics
last term, the first with 20 students and the second with 30 , decided
to assign a term project. After all projects had been turned in, the
instructor randomly ordered them before grading. Consider the first 15
graded projects.

a\. What is the probability that exactly 10 of these are from the second
section?

b\. What is the probability that at least 10 of these are from the
second section?

c\. What is the probability that at least 10 of these are from the same
section?

d\. What are the mean value and standard deviation of the number among
these 15 that are from the second section?

e\. What are the mean value and standard deviation of the number of
projects not among these first 15 that are from the second section?

71\. A geologist has collected 10 specimens of basaltic rock and 10
specimens of granite. The geologist instructs a laboratory assistant to
randomly select 15 of the specimens for analysis.

a\. What is the pmf of the number of granite specimens selected for
analysis?

b\. What is the probability that all specimens of one of the two types
of rock are selected for analysis?

c\. What is the probability that the number of granite specimens
selected for analysis is within 1 standard deviation of its mean value?

72\. A personnel director interviewing 11 senior engineers for four job
openings has scheduled six interviews for the first day and five for the
second day of interviewing. Assume that the candidates are interviewed
in random order.

a\. What is the probability that $x$ of the top four candidates are
interviewed on the first day?

b\. How many of the top four candidates can be expected to be
interviewed on the first day?

73\. Twenty pairs of individuals playing in a bridge tournament have
been seeded $1,\ldots ,{20}$ . In the first part of the tournament, the
20 are randomly divided into 10 east-west pairs and 10 north-south
pairs.

a\. What is the probability that $x$ of the top 10 pairs end up playing
east-west?

b\. What is the probability that all of the top five pairs end up
playing the same direction?

c\. If there are ${2n}$ pairs, what is the pmf of $X =$ the number among
the top $n$ pairs who end up playing east-west? What are
$E\left( X\right)$ and $V\left( X\right)$ ?

74\. A second-stage smog alert has been called in a certain area of Los
Angeles County in which there are 50 industrial firms. An inspector will
visit 10 randomly selected firms to check for violations of regulations.

a\. If 15 of the firms are actually violating at least one regulation,
what is the pmf of the number of firms visited by the inspector that are
in violation of at least one regulation?

b\. If there are 500 firms in the area, of which 150 are in violation,
approximate the pmf of part (a) by a simpler pmf.

c\. For $X =$ the number among the 10 visited that are in violation,
compute $E\left( X\right)$ and $V\left( X\right)$ both for the exact pmf
and the approximating pmf in part (b).

75\. The probability that a randomly selected box of a certain type of
cereal has a particular prize is .2. Suppose you purchase box after box
until you have obtained two of these prizes.

a\. What is the probability that you purchase $x$ boxes that do not have
the desired prize?

b\. What is the probability that you purchase four boxes?

c\. What is the probability that you purchase at most four boxes?

d\. How many boxes without the desired prize do you expect to purchase?
How many boxes do you expect to purchase?

76\. A family decides to have children until it has three children of
the same gender. Assuming $P\left( B\right) = P\left( G\right) = {.5}$ ,
what is the pmf of $X =$ the number of children in the family?

77\. Three brothers and their wives decide to have children until each
family has two female children. What is the pmf of $X =$ the total
number of male children born to the brothers? What is $E\left( X\right)$
, and how does it compare to the expected number of male children born
to each brother?

78\. According to the article \"Characterizing the Severity and Risk of
Drought in the Poudre River, Colorado\" (J. of Water Res. Planning and
Mgmnt., 2005: 383-393), the drought length $Y$ is the number of
consecutive time intervals in which the water supply remains below a
critical value ${y}_{0}$ (a deficit), preceded by and followed by
periods in which the supply exceeds this critical value (a surplus). The
cited paper proposes a geometric distribution with $p = {.409}$ for this
random variable.

a\. What is the probability that a drought lasts exactly 3 intervals? At
most 3 intervals?

b\. What is the probability that the length of a drought exceeds its
mean value by at least one standard deviation?