## 4.2.5 Expected Values

For a discrete random variable $X, E\left( X\right)$ was obtained by summing $x \cdot p\left( x\right)$ over possible $X$ values. Here we replace summation by integration and the pmf by the pdf to get a continuous weighted average.

DEFINITION The expected or mean value of a continuous rv $X$ with $\operatorname{pdf}f\left( x\right)$ is

$$
{\mu }_{X} = E\left( X\right) = {\int }_{-\infty }^{\infty }x \cdot f\left( x\right) {dx}
$$

EXAMPLE 4.10 The pdf of weekly gravel sales $X$ was

(Example 4.9

$$
f\left( x\right) = \left\{ \begin{matrix} \frac{3}{2}\left( {1 - {x}^{2}}\right) & 0 \leq x \leq 1 \\ 0 & \text{ otherwise } \end{matrix}\right.
$$

continued)

$$
E\left( X\right) = {\int }_{-\infty }^{\infty }x \cdot f\left( x\right) {dx} = {\int }_{0}^{1}x \cdot \frac{3}{2}\left( {1 - {x}^{2}}\right) {dx}
$$

$$
= {\left. \frac{3}{2}{\int }_{0}^{1}\left( x - {x}^{3}\right) dx = \frac{3}{2}\left( \frac{{x}^{2}}{2} - \frac{{x}^{4}}{4}\right) \right| }_{x = 0}^{x = 1} = \frac{3}{8}
$$

When the pdf $f\left( x\right)$ specifies a model for the distribution of values in a numerical population, then $\mu$ is the population mean, which is the most frequently used measure of population location or center.

Often we wish to compute the expected value of some function $h\left( X\right)$ of the rv $X$ . If we think of $h\left( X\right)$ as a new rv $Y$ , techniques from mathematical statistics can be used to derive the pdf of $Y$ , and $E\left( Y\right)$ can then be computed from the definition. Fortunately, as in the discrete case, there is an easier way to compute $E\left\lbrack {h\left( X\right) }\right\rbrack$ .

PROPOSITION If $X$ is a continuous $\operatorname{rv}$ with $\operatorname{pdf}f\left( x\right)$ and $h\left( X\right)$ is any function of $X$ , then

$$
E\left\lbrack {h\left( X\right) }\right\rbrack = {\mu }_{h\left( X\right) } = {\int }_{-\infty }^{\infty }h\left( x\right) \cdot f\left( x\right) {dx}
$$

That is, just as $E\left( X\right)$ is a weighted average of possible $X$ values, where the weighting function is the pdf $f\left( x\right) , E\left\lbrack {h\left( X\right) }\right\rbrack$ is a weighted average of $h\left( X\right)$ values.

- Two species are competing in a region for control of a limited amount of a certain resource. Let $X =$ the proportion of the resource controlled by species 1 and suppose $X$ has pdf

$$
f\left( x\right) = \left\{ \begin{array}{ll} 1 & 0 \leq x \leq 1 \\ 0 & \text{ otherwise } \end{array}\right.
$$

which is a uniform distribution on $\left\lbrack {0,1}\right\rbrack$ . (In her book Ecological Diversity, E. C. Pielou calls this the "broken-stick" model for resource allocation, since it is analogous to breaking a stick at a randomly chosen point.) Then the species that controls the majority of this resource controls the amount

$$
h\left( X\right) = \max \left( {X,1 - X}\right) = \left\{ \begin{matrix} 1 - X & \text{ if }0 \leq X < \frac{1}{2} \\ X & \text{ if }\frac{1}{2} \leq X \leq 1 \end{matrix}\right.
$$

The expected amount controlled by the species having majority control is then

$$
E\left\lbrack {h\left( X\right) }\right\rbrack = {\int }_{-\infty }^{\infty }\max \left( {x,1 - x}\right) \cdot f\left( x\right) {dx} = {\int }_{0}^{1}\max \left( {x,1 - x}\right) \cdot {1dx}
$$

$$
= {\int }_{0}^{1/2}\left( {1 - x}\right) \cdot {1dx} + {\int }_{1/2}^{1}x \cdot {1dx} = \frac{3}{4}
$$

In the discrete case, the variance of $X$ was defined as the expected squared deviation from $\mu$ and was calculated by summation. Here again integration replaces summation.

---

DEFINITION

---

The variance of a continuous random variable $X$ with $\operatorname{pdf}f\left( x\right)$ and mean value $\mu$ is

$$
{\sigma }_{X}^{2} = V\left( X\right) = {\int }_{-\infty }^{\infty }{\left( x - \mu \right) }^{2} \cdot f\left( x\right) {dx} = E\left\lbrack {\left( X - \mu \right) }^{2}\right\rbrack
$$

The standard deviation (SD) of $X$ is ${\sigma }_{X} = \sqrt{V\left( X\right) }$ .

The variance and standard deviation give quantitative measures of how much spread there is in the distribution or population of $x$ values. Again $\sigma$ is roughly the size of a typical deviation from $\mu$ . Computation of ${\sigma }^{2}$ is facilitated by using the same shortcut formula employed in the discrete case.

PROPOSITION

$$
V\left( X\right) = E\left( {X}^{2}\right) - {\left\lbrack E\left( X\right) \right\rbrack }^{2}
$$

EXAMPLE 4.12 For $X =$ weekly gravel sales, we computed $E\left( X\right) = \frac{3}{8}$ . Since

(Example 4.10

continued)

$$
E\left( {X}^{2}\right) = {\int }_{-\infty }^{\infty }{x}^{2} \cdot f\left( x\right) {dx} = {\int }_{0}^{1}{x}^{2} \cdot \frac{3}{2}\left( {1 - {x}^{2}}\right) {dx}
$$

$$
= {\int }_{0}^{1}\frac{3}{2}\left( {{x}^{2} - {x}^{4}}\right) {dx} = \frac{1}{5}
$$

$$
V\left( X\right) = \frac{1}{5} - {\left( \frac{3}{8}\right) }^{2} = \frac{19}{320} = {.059}\text{ and }{\sigma }_{X} = {.244}
$$

When $h\left( X\right) = {aX} + b$ , the expected value and variance of $h\left( X\right)$ satisfy the same properties as in the discrete case: $E\left\lbrack {h\left( X\right) }\right\rbrack = {a\mu } + b$ and $V\left\lbrack {h\left( X\right) }\right\rbrack = {a}^{2} \cdot {\sigma }^{2}$ .