- If a six-sided die is tossed five times in succession 
	- rather than just twice, 
- then each possible outcome is an ordered collection of five numbers 
	- such as $\left( {1,3,1,2,4}\right)$ or $(6,5,2,2,2)$ . 

> [!definition] $k$-tuple
> - We will call an *ordered collection* of $k$ objects a **$k$-tuple** 
> - so 
> 	- a pair is a 2-tuple and 
> 	- a triple is a 3-tuple). 

Each outcome of the die-tossing experiment is then a *5-tuple*.

> [!theorem] Product Rule for $k$-Tuples
> Suppose 
> - a set consists of ordered collections of $k$ elements ($k$-tuples) 
> - there are ${n}_{1}$ possible choices for the first element; 
> 	- for each choice of the first element, 
> 		- there are ${n}_{2}$ possible choices of the second element
> 	- ... 
> 	- for each possible choice of the first $k - 1$ elements, 
> 		- there are ${n}_{k}$ choices of the $k$-th element. 
> - Then there are 
>   $${n}_{1}{n}_{2}\cdots \cdots {n}_{k}$$
>    possible $k$ -tuples.

- An alternative interpretation involves carrying out an operation in $k$ stages. 
- If 
	- the first stage can be performed in any one of ${n}_{1}$ ways, 
	- and for each such way there are ${n}_{2}$ ways to perform the second stage, 
	- and for each way of performing the first two stages there are ${n}_{3}$ ways to perform the ${3}^{\text{rd }}$ stage, 
	- and so on,
- then 
  $${n}_{1}{n}_{2}\cdots \cdot {n}_{k}$$
  is the number of ways to carry out the entire $k$ -stage operation in sequence. 
  This more general rule can also be visualized with a tree diagram. 
  
- For the case $k = 3$, 
	- simply add an appropriate number of ${3}^{\mathrm{{rd}}}$ generation branches to the tip of each ${2}^{\mathrm{{nd}}}$ generation branch. 
- If, for example, a college town has 
	- four pizza places, 
	- a theater complex with six screens, 
	- three places to go dancing, 
- then there would be 
	- four ${1}^{\text{st }}$ generation branches, 
	- six ${2}^{\text{nd }}$ generation branches emanating from the tip of each ${1}^{\text{st }}$ generation branch, 
	- and three ${3}^{\text{rd }}$ generation branches leading off each ${2}^{\text{nd }}$ generation branch. 
- Each possible 3-tuple corresponds to the tip of a ${3}^{\text{rd }}$ generation branch.

## EX 2.19 

([[2.3.1 The Product Rule for Ordered Pairs#^ex-2-17|Example 2.17]] continued)
- Suppose the home remodeling job involves first purchasing several kitchen appliances. 
	- They will all be purchased from the same dealer, 
	- and there are five dealers in the area. 
	- With the dealers denoted by ${D}_{1},\ldots ,{D}_{5}$ , 
	- there are 
	  $$N = {n}_{1}{n}_{2}{n}_{3} = \left( 5 \right) \left( 12 \right) \left( 9 \right) = 540$$
	  3-tuples of the form $\left( {D}_{i},{P}_{j},{Q}_{k} \right)$, 
- so there are 540 ways to choose 
	- first an appliance dealer, 
	- then a plumbing contractor, 
	- and finally an electrical contractor.

## EX 2.20

([[2.3.1 The Product Rule for Ordered Pairs#^ex-2-18|Example 2.18]] continued)
- If each clinic has both
	- three specialists in internal medicine and 
	- two general surgeons, 
- there are
  $${n}_{1}{n}_{2}{n}_{3}{n}_{4} = \left( 4\right) \left( 3\right) \left( 3\right) \left( 2\right) = {72}$$
  ways to select one doctor of each type 
  - such that all doctors practice at the same clinic.